                         HOUSE OF LORDS

      Procedure and Privileges Committee

           6th Report of Session 2021–22

 Divisions: pass-readers
           Sessional select
              committees
 Participation of eligible
        members in oral
statements and repeated
        urgent questions
                      Ordered to be printed 28 January 2022



            Published by the Authority of the House of Lords




                                              HL Paper 152
Procedure and Privileges Committee
The Select Committee on Procedure and Privileges of the House is appointed each session to
consider any proposals for alterations in the procedure of the House that may arise from time to
time, and whether the standing orders require to be amended.

Membership
The members of the Procedure and Privileges Committee are:
Lord Ashton of Hyde               Lord Mancroft
Lord Bew                          Lord McFall of Alcluith (Lord Speaker)
Lord Eames                        Baroness McIntosh of Hudnall
Baroness Evans of Bowes Park      Lord Newby
Lord Faulkner of Worcester        Baroness Quin
Lord Gardiner of Kimble (Chair)   Baroness Sanderson of Welton
Baroness Harris of Richmond       Lord Sherbourne of Didsbury
Baroness Humphreys                Baroness Smith of Basildon
Lord Judge                        Lord Stoneham of Droxford
Lord Kennedy of Southwark

Alternate members:
Baroness Browning (for backbench Conservative members)
Baroness Finlay of Llandaff (for Crossbench members, other than the Convenor)
Baroness Goudie (for backbench Labour members)
Lord Alderdice (for backbench Liberal Democrat members)
Lord Turnbull (for the Convenor)

Declaration of interests
A full list of Members’ interests can be found in the Register of Lords’ Interests:
http://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/standards-and-interests/register-of-lords-
interests

Publications
All publications of the Committee are available at:
https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/191/procedure-and-privileges-committee/
publications/

Further information
Further information about the House of Lords and its Committees, including guidance to
witnesses, details of current inquiries and forthcoming meetings is available at:
http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords

Contact details
All correspondence should be addressed to the clerk of the Procedure and Privileges
Committee, House of Lords, London SW1A 0PW. Telephone 020 7219 8796/1624. Email
JohnsonC@parliament.uk
     Sixth report
     Divisions: pass-readers
     Introduction
1.   On 25 October 2021 the House debated our recommendations for the
     introduction of a new procedure for conducting divisions, using pass-readers
     located in the division lobbies and in Prince’s Chamber. Three amendments
     were tabled to this aspect of our report, and after a full debate the Senior
     Deputy Speaker withdrew the motion to agree the report.
2.   After a period of reflection, we published an interim update in our Fifth
     Report, confirming that we remained convinced of the benefits of pass-
     readers, in terms both of speed and accuracy. We acknowledged the concern
     expressed over our initial proposal to dispense with Tellers, and indicated
     that any further proposals we brought forward would retain the role of Teller.
3.   Following a further discussion at our meeting on 18 January 2022, we now
     seek the House’s agreement to these revised proposals for the conduct of
     divisions using pass-readers. We have made these proposals now, with a view
     to commissioning the further work that is required to complete software
     development. This work will take some weeks, and staff are working at speed
     to get the system ready as soon as possible. We propose that the decision
     as to exactly when to deploy pass-reader voting should then be made by
     the House of Lords Commission, taking into account the prevailing public
     health situation.

     The new procedure: key principles
4.   The proposed process for conducting divisions is outlined in Box 1. It is closely
     modelled on the pre-pandemic process, in that it retains the requirement for
     each side to appoint Tellers within three minutes of a vote being called, and
     the principle that if Tellers are not appointed for one side, the question will
     be decided in favour of the other side and the division will be terminated.
5.   The key difference between what we now propose and the pre-pandemic
     process is that members will vote in the lobbies by presenting a valid security
     pass to one of the pass-readers, before leaving the lobbies past the Tellers.
     The pass-readers will then generate the authoritative figure for the number
     of members voting, as well as recording their names. While the Tellers will
     also count members manually, and will validate the result after their return
     to the Table, their figure will only be used as the authority for the result if
     the pass-reader system fails.
6.   This key change is, in our view, essential if the House is to realise the
     benefits of speed, accuracy and security. It follows that in order to vote,
     members will be required to present a valid parliamentary security pass
     that has been registered to the pass-reader system, and we propose that this
     new rule should be reflected in an amended Standing Order. If a member
     mislays their security pass any day-pass issued to them by the Pass Office
     will be automatically registered to the pass-reader system; outside working
     hours such day-passes will be available from Peers’ Entrance. It will be the
     responsibility of each individual member to have their pass with them in
     order to cast their vote and the Clerks at the Table will not have the authority
2       6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE


        to register the vote of a member who cannot show their security pass or a
        valid day-pass.

                            Box 1: The process for divisions

    Starting the division
    The Question is put, and voices are heard on both sides. The member on the
    Woolsack instructs the clerk to begin a division.
    The clerk enters the division information and launches the division. The pass-
    readers are activated and the voting period for eligible members starts. The
    clerk rises and bows to the member on the Woolsack.
    The member on the Woolsack rises and says: “Voting is now open. Clear the
    bar.”
    The doorkeepers sound the division bells, update the annunciator, and prepare
    the lobbies.
    First three minutes
    Tellers must be appointed within three minutes.
    Members can vote immediately, but are required to remain in the lobbies until
    Tellers are in place. Once Tellers are in place, the exits from the lobbies may be
    unlocked, and members pass the Tellers on their way out of the lobbies.
    If after three minutes no Tellers have been appointed for one or other side, the
    Question is decided in favour of the side which has appointed Tellers.
    If Tellers have been appointed, after three minutes the clerk bows to the member
    on the Woolsack, who repeats the Question and takes the voices. If there are
    voices on both sides, they then say: “The Contents will go to the right by the
    Throne. The Not-contents to the left by the Bar.”
    If there are no voices on one or other side, the Question is decided on the voices
    and the division is cancelled.
    During the division
    Members continue to pass through the lobbies, voting by tapping their passes,
    confirming that they have been registered by the pass-readers, and being
    counted by the Tellers at the end of each lobby.
    Members eligible for remote participation under SO 24A may vote on PeerHub.
    The clerk takes the votes of infirm members and of the member on the Woolsack
    (who will be required to present a valid security pass) and records their votes in
    the divisions system.
    Ending the division
    The PeerHub voting period for remote members expires automatically after
    eight minutes.
    At eight minutes, the clerk bows to the member on the Woolsack, who then
    repeats the Question without taking the voices. The doors into the Chamber are
    locked.
             6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE                     3



 Voting continues in the lobbies until all members have voted. The Tellers agree
 their numbers (to be given to the clerk and used as back-up if the pass-reader
 system fails) and return to the Chamber. When both sets of Tellers have returned
 the clerk ends the division on the system, deactivating the pass-readers.The
 clerk imports the voting figures for PeerHub and the pass-readers. The system
 combines all the figures to produce the final totals.
 The clerk writes the result on a paper slip and gives it to a Teller for the winning
 side.
 The Teller for the winning side approaches the Woolsack and the result is
 announced.
 After the division
 The Table Office updates the contextual information (e.g. adding the text of any
 amendment) and submits the result. This sends the information to the website,
 Hansard, and the text/email notifications.
      Testing and roll-out
7.    As part of the completion of the system, it will be essential to register all
      members’ passes to the system. 583 members have already registered their
      passes, and staff will ensure that there are opportunities for all other members
      to do so.
8.    It will also be vital to test the system rigorously, to identify any issues, and to
      conduct realistic rehearsals, so that members can familiarise themselves with
      the process before it goes live.

      Location of pass-readers
9.    As part of finalising the system and testing, and if time allows, staff will
      add a fifth pass-reader (re-using the devices previously placed in Prince’s
      Chamber). Once the system is live, staff will monitor traffic in the lobbies,
      and the pass-readers themselves will gather usage data, informing any
      necessary adjustments.
10.   It is proposed that members should not be divided alphabetically: having
      decided to go through either the contents or the not-contents lobby, as the
      case may be, members will be free to use any pass-reader in that lobby.
      Initially we expect the lobbies to be divided into two streams by means of
      rope barriers, to reduce the impact of a temporary blockage at one pass-
      reader, but it will be for members themselves to decide which queue to join.
      Arrangements in the lobbies will of course be kept under review.

      Voting in the ‘wrong lobby’
11.   The pass-readers will be networked, sharing data in real time. This means
      that members will in future be unable to vote in both lobbies. If they attempt
      to do so, they will receive an error message in the second lobby, which will
      tell them to go to the clerk at the Table if they wish to change their vote.
      This process replicates the principle that has hitherto underpinned Standing
      Order 54, though the Standing Order itself will need to be rewritten.
4       6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE


        Accessibility and members who are blind
12.     The system has been designed to be accessible and clear to users. The first
        pass-reader in each lobby is on a lower stand, making it more easily accessible
        to members using wheelchairs. When a member brings a valid security pass
        close to the pass-reader device located next to the screen, a message will
        appear on the screen with the member’s name, confirming that they have
        voted content or not-content, as the case may be. This message will remain
        on screen for a few seconds before disappearing, or until the next member
        votes, when it will be replaced. The system also emits a ‘bleep’ to confirm
        that a vote has been cast.
13.     Staff have liaised with members who are blind to discuss their use of the
        system. No changes to the system are planned at this stage, but minor
        adaptations may be made following the tests with members to ensure that
        they are able to use the pass-readers. Members who are blind or severely
        visually impaired will also be entitled to cast their vote with the Clerk at the
        Table in the event of any difficulty in using the pass-readers.

        Contingency arrangements
14.     The pass-reader system was introduced in the House of Commons in late
        2021, and has been highly reliable. But it is impossible to completely rule out
        the possibility of either the pass-reader system failing, or of some other issue
        making the pass-reader devices unavailable, such as a power failure.
15.     We propose that in the event of the system failing, the Tellers’ count would be
        authoritative. Staff would record names in each lobby, using paper division
        sheets. The Tellers’ count would be reported to the clerk at the Table, who
        would add the totals for those voting in the Chamber and for eligible members
        voting on PeerHub. Before the system goes live we will also consider whether
        the option of deferred divisions (introduced on a temporary basis as part of
        hybrid House procedures, and still available in the event that the electronic
        voting system fails) should be put on a permanent footing.

        Recommendation
16.     We invite the House:

        •      To agree the process described in Box 1 of this report for the
               conduct of divisions using pass-readers;

        •      To agree the amendments to Standing Orders 52–54 set out in
               Appendix 1;

        •      To mandate the House of Lords Commission, once the pass-
               reader system is ready, to decide when it should be put into
               operation, taking into account the prevailing public health
               situation.

        Sessional select committees
17.     On 13 January 2021 the House agreed the report of the Liaison Committee,
        Review of investigative and scrutiny committees: strengthening the thematic
        structure through the appointment of new committees.1 The report contained the

1     Liaison Committee, Review of investigative and scrutiny committees: strengthening the thematic structure
      through the appointment of new committees (5th Report, Session 2019–21, HL Paper 193)
                6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE                                       5


        final proposals arising from the Liaison Committee’s comprehensive review
        of the House’s select committee structure, commenced in 2017, including in
        particular successor committees to the European Union Committee and its
        Sub-Committees.
18.     Following the House’s agreement to the report, on 14 April 2021 the
        House for the first time appointed the Environment and Climate Change
        Committee, the European Affairs Committee, the Industry and Regulators
        Committee and the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, all of which
        replaced the EU Select Committee and its sub-committees, along with the
        new Built Environment Committee. In order for these new committees to be
        ‘sessional committees’ (that is to say, in order for them to be able to continue
        in existence from one parliamentary session to the next), Standing Order 63
        now needs to be updated. We propose the necessary updates in the Appendix.
19.     We recommend that Standing Order 63 be updated in the terms set
        out in Appendix 1, to reflect the new committee structure agreed by
        the House in January 2021.

        Participation of eligible members in oral statements and repeated
        urgent questions
20. Following the House’s agreement to our Fourth Report,2 on 6 December
    the House adopted a new procedure for the remote participation of disabled
    members deemed eligible under SO 24A in oral questions. Under this
    new procedure, the use of speakers’ lists for supplementary questions was
    discontinued, and instead eligible members are now required to notify the
    Government Whips’ Office and their own party or group of their wish to
    ask a supplementary question by the previous working day. It is then for
    the Leader of the House, as part of her responsibility of assisting the House
    during question time, and following consultation with the usual channels, to
    call on Members participating remotely as appropriate.
21.     This change has, in our view, been a success: the Chamber is fuller during oral
        questions, and exchanges are more spontaneous. Data from before and after
        the change also show an increase in the average number of supplementary
        questions asked per oral question.3
22. In our Fourth Report we undertook to “continue to reflect on other types
    of proceeding, such as oral statements, and on the best way to facilitate
    the full participation of eligible disabled Members”. The Government
    Chief Whip has now proposed to us that the procedure for facilitating the
    participation of disabled members deemed eligible under Standing Order
    24A in oral questions should be extended to oral statements and repeated
    urgent questions, whenever there is sufficient notice of such business. We
    support this change, which will mean that eligible disabled members who
    have given notice of their wish to intervene, rather than being called at a
    fixed point in proceedings, will be called on by the Leader of the House
    or her delegate at an appropriate point. As for oral questions, this means
    that remote participants, like those who are physically present, will not be
    guaranteed an opportunity to speak.
2     Procedure and Privileges Committee, Speakers’ lists for oral questions and ‘Secretary of State’ questions
      Divisions: passreaders (4th Report, Session 2021–22, HL Paper 104); see HL Deb., 1 December 2021,
      cols 1357–73.
3     The number of supplementary questions per oral question rose from 7.6 in the two weeks before
      6 December to 8.4 in the two weeks following the change.
6     6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE


23.   This change will not require any further amendment to SO 24A.
24. We recommend that the procedure introduced on 6 December 2021
    to enable disabled members, who have been deemed eligible to
    participate remotely in accordance with SO 24A, to ask supplementary
    questions during oral questions, should be extended with immediate
    effect to oral statements and repeated urgent questions.
            6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE                 7


Appendix 1: AMENDMENTS TO STANDING ORDERS

Divisions
Proposed new text is bold; text that is proposed for deletion is struck through.

52 Divisions [27 June 1865]
(1) When, on the Question being put, a division is called for, the member on the
Woolsack or in the Chair shall order the Bar to be cleared, and the Clerk will
start the division by activating the pass-readers in the division lobbies and
the electronic voting system. Two Tellers shall be appointed by the Contents
and two by the Not-contents. After the lapse of three minutes from the time when
the Bar is ordered to be cleared, the member on the Woolsack or in the Chair shall
again put the Question.
(1A) Two Tellers shall be appointed by the Contents and two by the Not-
contents. One Teller for the Contents and one for the Not-contents shall be
appointed for each division lobby.
(2) After the lapse of three minutes from the time when the Bar is ordered
to be cleared, the member on the Woolsack or in the Chair shall again put
the Question. If, after a lapse of three minutes from the time when the Bar is
ordered to be cleared at this point, Tellers have not been appointed either for the
Contents or for the Not-contents, a division cannot take place. The member on
the Woolsack or in the Chair shall declare the Question decided in favour of the
side which has appointed Tellers.
(3) One Teller for the Contents and one for the Not-contents shall be appointed
for each division lobby without respect to their degree; and clerks shall be in
attendance in each lobby to record the names of the Contents and Not-contents
respectively; the Tellers shall count the votes and announce the numbers to the
member on the Woolsack or in the Chair.
(3A) To cast a vote, a member must present a valid security pass to one
of the pass-readers located in the division lobbies, except as otherwise
provided for in Standing Orders 24A and 53. Having voted, a member
should pass the Tellers as they leave the lobby.
(4) After the lapse of eight minutes from the time when the Bar is ordered to be
cleared, or longer at the discretion of the member on the Woolsack or in the Chair,
the doors of the Chamber shall be locked, and the member on the Woolsack or in
the Chair shall inform the House or the committee of the Question which is the
subject of the division.
(5) A member Lord may vote in a division although they did not hear the Question
put.

53 Votes counted in the House [27 June 1865]
Any member Lord may, on the ground of infirmity, have the privilege of voting
in their place being told in their seat; and the votes of such members Lord and
of the member Lord on the Woolsack or in the Chair shall be taken first by the
Clerk and notified to the Tellers on their return from the division lobbies.
8    6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE


54 Voting in wrong lobby [27 June 1865]
If any Lord shall have by mistake gone out with the Contents or Not-contents
(as the case may be), having intended to vote on the other side, they shall wait
until the other Lords in the same lobby shall have passed out, and on presenting
themselves to the Tellers desire that they may not be counted by them, they having
entered that lobby by mistake; and the Tellers shall thereupon come with such
Lord to the Table, and inform the House of the circumstances, and shall ask the
said Lord whether they desire to vote Content or Not-content, and the vote of the
said Lord as then declared by them shall be taken by the Tellers in the House, and
recorded by the Tellers accordingly.
If any member has by mistake voted either Content or Not-content, having
intended to vote on the other side, they may go to the Clerk at the Table
before the end of the division and request to change their vote. The Clerk
will inform the Tellers of the change before the result of the division is
announced. Members may not vote in both lobbies.

Sessional select committees
Proposed new text is bold; text that is proposed for deletion is struck through.

63 Sessional Committees [10 November 1975]
The orders of appointment of the following Committees and any of their Sub-
Committees shall remain in force and effect, notwithstanding the prorogation of
Parliament, until such time as the House or Committee makes further orders of
appointment in the next succeeding session:
Built Environment Committee
Communications and Digital Committee
Conduct Committee
Consolidation Bills Committee
Constitution Committee
Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee
Economic Affairs Committee
Environment and Climate Change Committee
European Union Affairs Committee
Finance Committee
House of Lords Commission
Human Rights Committee
Hybrid Instruments Committee
Industry and Regulators Committee
International Agreements Committee
International Relations and Defence Committee
           6TH REPORT FROM THE PROCEDURE AND PRIVILEGES COMMITTEE   9


Justice and Home Affairs Committee
National Security Strategy Committee
Procedure and Privileges Committee
Public Services Committee
Science and Technology Committee
Secondary Legislation Scrutiny Committee
Services Committee
Standing Orders (Private Bills) Committee
Statutory Instruments Committee.

